feat(docs): some MCP client best practices (#2582)
modelcontextprotocol/modelcontextprotocol: docs/docs/develop/clients/client-best-practices.mdx

---
title: "Client Best Practices"

> description: "Get the most out of MCP when building a client"

Reviewer: The page covers two context-management patterns rather than general client guidance, and `build-client.mdx` already has per-language "Best practices" sections that this title will collide with in search.

```suggestion
title: "Scaling Clients to Many Tools"
description: "Manage context efficiently when a host connects to many MCP servers"
```

Reviewer: Title can be wordsmithed, TBH.

Author: The idea was to start a new section to document how to make better clients. The first two topics cover things related to scaling to many tools, but other future sections may not.

Perhaps "Building Great Clients"?

---

> As MCP clients, such as agents, connect to more MCP servers and accumulate access to hundreds or thousands of tools, naive approaches to tool management break down. Loading every tool definition into the model's context window upfront wastes tokens, increases latency, and degrades model performance. Passing large intermediate results through the model between sequential tool calls compounds the problem.

Reviewer: Per the [Architecture spec](/specification/draft/architecture) a client is 1:1 with a single server; the host is what aggregates multiple clients and runs the LLM. The next paragraph already says "host has access to dozens of servers" correctly, so this line should match.

```suggestion
As MCP host applications, such as agents, connect to more MCP servers and accumulate access to hundreds or thousands of tools, naive approaches to tool management break down. Loading every tool definition into the model's context window upfront wastes tokens, increases latency, and degrades model performance. Passing large intermediate results through the model between sequential tool calls compounds the problem.
```

Two patterns address these challenges: **progressive discovery**, which controls _when_ tool definitions enter context, and **programmatic tool calling**, which controls _how_ tools are invoked.

> ### Avoiding context bloat using progressive discovery of Servers and Tools

Reviewer: Heading hierarchy starts at `###` with no `##`, which drops every `####` subsection out of the Mintlify right-hand TOC and skips a level for screen readers. Siblings in `docs/develop/` start at `##`.

```suggestion
## Progressive Tool Discovery
```

Same promotion needed throughout: L141 → `## Programmatic Tool Calling`; L25, L34, L48, L97, L131, L155, L227, L240, L264 → `###`; and L273 (`Combining Both Patterns`) → `##` since it covers both patterns.

Naive MCP clients pass the tool definitions of every connected server directly to the model at the start of each conversation. For a handful of tools, this is perfectly reasonable. But when a host has access to dozens of servers exposing hundreds of tools, those definitions alone can consume the majority of the context window before the model has even read the user's message.

<img
  src="/images/progressive-discovery.svg"
  alt="Comparison of loading all tools upfront versus discovering tools on demand. The upfront approach consumes ~150,000 tokens on definitions alone, while progressive discovery uses ~2,000 tokens by loading only what the task requires."
/>

Progressive discovery avoids this:

- The client defers the loading of MCP tools.
- The client provides a lightweight `search_tools` tool.

> - The client loads full definitions only as needed.

Reviewer: "Defers the loading" reads as if the host skips `tools/list`. It still lists; it defers injecting into context. Also `search_tools` is a host-synthesized meta-tool, worth saying once.

```suggestion
- The host fetches tool definitions via `tools/list` as normal, but defers injecting them into the model's context.
- The host provides a lightweight `search_tools` meta-tool to the model.
- The host loads full definitions into context only as needed.
```

Once the tool definitions take up a significant part of the available context window, clients should switch to progressive discovery. We recommend that clients implement thresholds to determine when to switch:

- Implement a threshold as a percentage of the context window. For example, 1%-5%.
- Load tool definitions. Once the threshold is reached, switch to progressive discovery.

#### Choosing a Discovery Strategy

Once the model invokes the `search_tools` tool, we need to choose a search strategy:

- **Keyword-based**: Keyword matching (BM25, regex). Simple and effective, particularly for descriptive tool names and descriptions.
- **Embedding-based**: Vector-similarity retrieval over tool descriptions. Handles synonyms and semantic matching better.
- **Subagent-based**: A secondary model, often a small and fast model such as Claude Haiku or Gemini Flash, selects tools for the task. This usually works very well but can be more costly than embedding-based or keyword-based solutions.
- **Hybrid**: Combine approaches. For example, by scoring across keyword and embedding rankings, or choosing
  different strategies depending on use-case or query.

> Some model providers already offer built-in tool search. For example, both [OpenAI](https://developers.openai.com/api/docs/guides/tools-tool-search) and [Anthropic](https://platform.claude.com/docs/en/agents-and-tools/tool-use/tool-search-tool) support this natively. When available, you may prefer the platform's tool search over a custom implementation. Build your own when the provider doesn't offer one or when you need specialized retrieval logic (e.g., domain-specific ranking or access-control filtering).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some model providers already offer built-in tool search. For example, [OpenAI](https://developers.openai.com/api/docs/guides/tools-tool-search) and [Anthropic](https://platform.claude.com/docs/en/agents-and-tools/tool-use/tool-search-tool) support this natively; check your provider's documentation for an equivalent. When available, you may prefer the platform's tool search over a custom implementation. Build your own when the provider doesn't offer one or when you need specialized retrieval logic (e.g., domain-specific ranking or access-control filtering).
```

#### Dynamic Server Management

Progressive discovery extends beyond individual tools to entire servers. Rather than connecting to every configured server at startup, a client can:

1. Maintain a registry of available servers and their high-level descriptions.
2. Connect to a server only when the model determines it needs that server's capabilities.
3. Disconnect servers that are no longer relevant to the current task, freeing context.

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    participant Model
    participant Client
    participant Registry
    participant Server

    Model->>Client: search_available_servers("CRM")
    Client->>Registry: Query available servers
    Registry-->>Client: Salesforce server (not connected)
    Client-->>Model: Salesforce server available

    Model->>Client: enable_server("salesforce")
    Client->>Server: Initialize connection
    Server-->>Client: Server capabilities + tools
    Client-->>Model: Salesforce server connected

    Note over Model: Task complete

    Model->>Client: disable_server("salesforce")
    Client->>Server: Close connection
    Client-->>Model: Server disconnected, context freed
```

> This works especially well for general-purpose agents, where the user's intent isn't known upfront. The agent starts with a minimal set of always-on servers and connects others as needed. Combined with agent skills, the client can bring in servers and tools on demand.

Reviewer: Picking up the open thread above: link the skills page and say what the combination actually gives you.

```suggestion
This works especially well for general-purpose agents, where the user's intent isn't known upfront. The agent starts with a minimal set of always-on servers and connects others as needed. Combined with [agent skills](/docs/develop/build-with-agent-skills), a skill file can declare which MCP servers it needs, and the host connects them only when that skill is invoked.
```

#### Implementation Guidelines

When implementing progressive discovery:

| Guideline                        | Rationale                                                                                          |
| -------------------------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| **Offer multiple detail levels** | Let the model choose between name-only, name-and-description, or full-schema responses.            |
| **Cache tool definitions**       | Once a tool definition is loaded, keep it available for the duration of the session.               |

> | **Group tools by server**        | Present tools organized by their source server so the model can reason about related capabilities. |

Reviewer: "Cache" here means host-side memoization; as written it reads as contradicting "disconnect to free context" a few paragraphs up. Also worth a row for `list_changed`.

```suggestion
| **Cache tool definitions**       | Once fetched from a server, memoize the definition host-side so re-injecting it later doesn't need another `tools/list` round trip. This is separate from what's currently in the model's context. |
| **Refresh on `list_changed`**    | Re-index the search catalog when a server sends `notifications/tools/list_changed`.                |
| **Group tools by server**        | Present tools organized by their source server so the model can reason about related capabilities. |
```

> 

Reviewer: On the open prompt-caching thread: I think this needs to land in this PR since the page's premise is token cost. Suggested subsection to insert here:

```markdown
### Interaction with Prompt Caching

Most providers cache the prompt prefix, including the `tools` array. Adding or removing tool
definitions mid-conversation invalidates that cache, and the resulting miss can cost more tokens
than the definitions you removed. To preserve caching:

- Append newly discovered definitions after the cache breakpoint rather than re-sorting the
  `tools` array, or route every call through a single stable `call_tool({name, args})` meta-tool
  so the array never changes.
- Treat server disconnection as a conversation-boundary operation rather than a per-turn one.
- Consult your provider's caching documentation alongside the tool-search links above.
```

Author: Added locally and will push soon

### Programmatic Tool Calling / Code Mode

With direct tool calling, every tool invocation is a round trip: the model generates a tool call, the client executes it, and the full result flows back into the model's context. When a task requires chaining multiple tools (read a document, transform it, write it somewhere else), each intermediate result passes through the model, consuming tokens and adding latency even when it has nothing to do with them.

Programmatic tool calling (sometimes called "code mode") provides a way for clients to **compose tool calls** effectively. Instead of calling tools directly, the model writes code that calls tools. The code executes in a sandboxed environment, and only the final result returns to the model.

Programmatic tool calling is powerful and allows for more efficient use of MCP tools and resources, but requires
clients to implement a sandbox environment.

> <img
>   src="/images/programmatic-tool-calling.svg"
>   alt="Comparison of direct tool calling versus programmatic tool calling. Direct calling requires three round trips through the model with ~150K tokens. Programmatic calling uses one round trip, with the code executing tool calls directly in a sandbox, returning ~200 tokens."
> />

Reviewer: Alt text says "~150K tokens" and "returning ~200 tokens" but the SVG renders "~100K+ tokens" and "~15 tokens returned" (the ~200 is the script *sent*). The 150K figure belongs to the other diagram.

```suggestion
<img
  src="/images/programmatic-tool-calling.svg"
  alt="Comparison of direct tool calling versus programmatic tool calling. Direct calling passes every intermediate result through the model (~100K+ tokens). Programmatic calling sends a ~200-token script to a sandbox, which executes the tool calls and returns a ~15-token summary."
/>
```

```typescript
// Auto-generated from the Logging MCP server's tool schema
interface LogEntry {
  timestamp: string;
  message: string;
  level: string;
}

function logging_getLogs(input: {
  level: "error" | "warn" | "info";
  since: number;
}): Promise<{ entries: LogEntry[] }> {
  return mcp.callTool<{ entries: LogEntry[] }>("logging_getLogs", input);
}

// Auto-generated from the Ticketing MCP server's tool schema
function ticketing_createIssue(input: {
  title: string;
  body?: string;
  priority: "low" | "medium" | "high";
}): Promise<{ issueId: string }> {
  return mcp.callTool<{ issueId: string }>("ticketing_createIssue", input);
}
```

MCP Servers can provide an optional [`outputSchema`](/specification/draft/server/tools#output-schema) for each tool. When an output schema is present, the client can produce precise return types (like `LogEntry` above).

When an output schema is absent, there are two fallback strategies:

- Use a generic type (e.g., `any`) and move on. Accept `any` or `string` as the return type and handle the unstructured output downstream.

> - Extract a typed result using a fast model. Pass the tool's output to a lightweight model like Claude Haiku or Gemini Flash with instructions to coerce it into a known type, for example, `extract(mcpTool('generic_tool', params), Model.AnthropicHaiku, ExpectedType)`, where `ExpectedType` is a type definition the model can target. If the conversion fails, the model can fall back to a generic string or surface an error.

Reviewer: Two things here. `extract()` runs inside the sandbox and calls an external LLM, which contradicts "no direct network access" below unless it's host-brokered like the MCP stubs are; that should be stated. And it's listed as a peer of `any` with no steer on cost or determinism. The `Model.AnthropicHaiku` enum in the snippet should also go.

```suggestion
When an output schema is absent, prefer the simple path:

- **Use a generic type and move on.** Accept `any` or `string` and handle the unstructured output downstream. The real fix is for server authors to provide `outputSchema`.
- **Extract a typed result using a fast model**, for single-shot calls outside loops. Expose a host-brokered `extract(value, ExpectedType)` helper through the same stub-interception path as MCP tool calls so the sandbox itself never opens a network connection. The helper routes to a small model (for example, Claude Haiku or Gemini Flash) to coerce the value into `ExpectedType`. This adds per-call latency and can hallucinate or drop fields, so validate the result against `ExpectedType` before use.
```

```typescript
// Model-generated code, executes in sandbox
const logs = await logging_getLogs({
  level: "error",
  since: Date.now() - 3600000,
});

// Filter and deduplicate inside the sandbox, not in the model's context
const uniqueErrors = new Map<string, LogEntry>();
for (const log of logs.entries) {
  if (!uniqueErrors.has(log.message)) {
    uniqueErrors.set(log.message, log);
  }
}

for (const [message, log] of uniqueErrors) {
  await ticketing_createIssue({
    title: `Error: ${message}`,
    body: `First seen: ${log.timestamp}\nOccurrences: ${
      logs.entries.filter((l) => l.message === message).length
    }`,
    priority: "high",
  });
}

console.log(
  `Filed ${uniqueErrors.size} tickets from ${logs.entries.length} error logs`,
);
```

**Step 3: The sandbox executes the code.** Function calls inside the sandbox are intercepted and routed back to the appropriate MCP server through the client. The log data and ticket creation flow directly between servers without ever entering the model's context. Only the `console.log` output, a single summary line, returns to the model.

#### Choosing a Sandbox

> The right sandbox depends on the language you want the model to write, your host application's language, and how much isolation you need:

Reviewer: Worth a one-line disclaimer above the table since two of the four entries are early-stage projects:

```suggestion
The right sandbox depends on the language you want the model to write, your host application's language, and how much isolation you need. The table lists example runtimes rather than endorsements; evaluate maturity for your use case:
```

| Sandboxed language | Runtime / Library                                        | Host language | Approach                                                                                        |
| ------------------ | -------------------------------------------------------- | ------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| **JavaScript**     | [Deno](https://github.com/denoland/deno)                 | Rust / CLI    | V8-based runtime with fine-grained permissions. Can disable all permissions for full lockdown.  |
| **Python**         | [Monty](https://github.com/pydantic/monty)               | Rust          | Minimal, secure Python interpreter built for AI use cases. No I/O by default.                   |
| **TypeScript**     | [pctx](https://github.com/portofcontext/pctx)            | Python / Rust | Incorporates code mode concepts more explicitly as a library, as well as low-level Rust support |

> | **Any (via Wasm)** | [Wasmtime](https://github.com/bytecodealliance/wasmtime) | Rust / C / Go | Compile any language to Wasm and run it with capability-based security.                         |

Reviewer: Monty's own README leads with "Experimental — not ready for the prime time" (currently v0.0.16, no class definitions, no `match`). pctx is about five months old at v0.7.1. They shouldn't sit unqualified next to Deno and Wasmtime. Also adding `isolated-vm` since it came up in the earlier thread.

```suggestion
| **JavaScript**     | [Deno](https://github.com/denoland/deno), `isolated-vm`       | Rust / CLI    | V8-based runtimes with fine-grained permissions. Can disable all permissions for full lockdown. |
| **Python**         | [Monty](https://github.com/pydantic/monty) *(experimental)*   | Rust          | Minimal Python interpreter built for AI use cases. No I/O by default.                           |
| **TypeScript**     | [pctx](https://github.com/portofcontext/pctx) *(early-stage)* | Python / Rust | Incorporates code mode concepts as a library, with low-level Rust support.                      |
| **Any (via Wasm)** | [Wasmtime](https://github.com/bytecodealliance/wasmtime)      | Rust / C / Go | Compile any language to Wasm and run it with capability-based security.                         |
```

> Regardless of sandbox, the integration pattern is the same: the client injects function stubs, intercepts calls, and dispatches them as underlying `tools/call` requests to MCP servers.

Reviewer: "No direct network access" only holds if the stub→broker channel is stdio or in-process. A `fetch('http://127.0.0.1:PORT')` implementation needs `--allow-net=127.0.0.1`, which reopens every localhost service.

```suggestion
Regardless of sandbox, the integration pattern is the same: the host injects function stubs, intercepts calls over an in-process or stdio channel (so network permissions can stay fully denied), and dispatches them as `tools/call` requests to MCP servers.
```

#### Execution Architecture

The implementation has three components:

```mermaid
flowchart LR
    subgraph Host["MCP Host"]
        A[LLM] -->|writes code| B[Sandbox]
        B -->|function call| C[MCP Client]
        C -->|return value| B
        B -->|console output| A
    end
    C -->|tool call| D[MCP Server A]
    C -->|tool call| E[MCP Server B]
    D -->|result| C
    E -->|result| C
```

**The sandbox** runs model-generated code in an isolated environment with no direct network access. Its only interface to the outside world is through the generated function stubs, which route calls back to the client.

> **The client** acts as a broker. It receives function calls from the sandbox, maps them to the correct MCP server, executes the tool call, and returns the result to the sandbox. Authorization tokens and credentials are held by the client and never exposed to the generated code.

Reviewer: Same host/client terminology point as L6.

```suggestion
**The host** acts as a broker. It receives function calls from the sandbox, maps them to the correct MCP server, executes the tool call, and returns the result to the sandbox. Authorization tokens and credentials are held by the host and never exposed to the generated code.
```

Author: Applied locally and will push shortly

**The model** sees only what the sandbox returns, typically the output of `console.log` statements or a final return value. This gives the model (and the client developer) precise control over what enters the context window.

#### Security Considerations

Programmatic tool calling introduces a code execution surface that requires careful sandboxing:

- **Network isolation**: The sandbox should have no direct network access. All external communication flows through the MCP client, which enforces authorization and access control.
- **No credential exposure**: API keys and tokens are held by the client, not passed into the sandbox. The generated code calls typed functions; the client adds authentication when forwarding to MCP servers.
- **Resource limits**: Set timeouts and memory limits on sandbox execution to prevent runaway scripts.

> - **Output filtering**: Validate and truncate sandbox output before feeding it back to the model.

Reviewer: All four bullets protect the host from the sandbox; none protect the user from the model. The worked example above batches N `createIssue` writes behind one "run script" approval, and pipes Server A output into Server B arguments unreviewed. Both bypass the human-in-the-loop guidance in the [Tools security section](/specification/draft/server/tools#security) and need a replacement here.

```suggestion
#### Security Considerations

Programmatic tool calling introduces a code execution surface that requires careful sandboxing:

- **Per-call authorization**: The broker is still the MCP client for spec purposes. Apply the same human-in-the-loop confirmation policy to sandbox-originated calls that you apply to direct calls (see [Tools: Security](/specification/draft/server/tools#security)). Approving the script does not grant blanket approval for every tool call it makes at runtime.
- **Cross-server data flow**: Tool results from one server are untrusted input to another. The broker should apply the same input-review policy to brokered calls as to direct ones; output truncation alone does not prevent exfiltration.
- **Network isolation**: The sandbox should have no direct network access. All external communication flows through the host broker, which enforces authorization and access control.
- **No credential exposure**: API keys and tokens are held by the host. The generated code calls typed functions; the host adds authentication when forwarding to servers.
- **Resource limits**: Set timeouts and memory limits on sandbox execution to prevent runaway scripts.
- **Output filtering**: Validate and truncate sandbox console output before feeding it back to the model.
```

Author: Should this say:

The broker is still the MCP **host** for spec purposes per the other suggested changes?

The host is sort of always the broker right because it's choosing between multiple client <-> server connections to route the tool call?

Author: Applied locally and will push soon

> 

Reviewer: MCP tool errors arrive as a successful response with `isError: true` ([spec](/specification/draft/server/tools#error-handling)), but the generated wrappers above return bare success-typed Promises and the example loop has no `try`/`catch`. What happens mid-loop is undefined. Suggested subsection to insert here:

```markdown
#### Error Handling

MCP tool errors arrive as a successful response with `isError: true` rather than a transport
failure. Generated wrappers should convert this into a thrown exception so model-authored code
can use `try`/`catch`. If an uncaught error terminates the script, surface it as the script's
result so the model can self-correct; the model is responsible for reporting any partial side
effects already committed.
```
